Complexity Theory
	The object is to classify problems as easy ones and hard ones.
Computability Theory
	The classification of problem is by those that are solvable and those that are not.


Automata Theory

	Automata Theory deals with the definitions and properties of mathematical models of computation.

	One Model Called the finite Automaton
		is used in text processing, compilers, and hardware design.

	Another Model called the Context-free grammer,
		is used in programming languages and artificial intelligence.

SET

	A set is a group of objects represented as a unit.

		A object in a set are called its elements or members.

Sequence and Tuples

	A sequence of objects is a list of these objects in some order.
		Repition also matters in sequence 
		written as (1,25,6)

	Finite sequences called Tuples

	A sequence with k elements is k-tuple.
		A 2-tuple is also called an ordered pair.

Function
	Function is an object that sets up an input-output relationship.

		F(a) = b
			where a is input and b is output

	Domain
		The set of possible input to the function is called its domain.

	Range
		The outputs of a function come from a set called its range.

	The notation for saying that F is a function with domain D and range R is
		F:D->R

	A predicate or property is a function whose range is { TRUE, FALSE}.

	A property whose domain is a set of k-tuple is called a relation, a k-ary relation on A.

	The predicate P:D->{TRUE,FALSE} may be written (D,S), where S = {a ∈ D| P(a)=TRUE}
		The relation beats may be written 
		  {(SCISSORS, PAPER),(PAPER, STONE),(STONE,SCISSORS)}.


GRAPHS
	
	An undirected graph, or simply a graph, is a set of points with lines connecting some of the points. the points are called nodes or vertices, and the lines are called edges.

	The number of edges at a perticular node is the degree of that node.

	If V is the set of nodes of G and E is the set of edges, we say G = (V, E) 

Strings

	A string over an alphabet is a finite sequence of symbols from that alphabet, usually written next to one another and not separated by commas.

	An alphabet is a nonempty finite set.
	The members are the symbols of the alphabet.
		Example of alphabets.
			Σ(2) = {a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,j,k,l,m,n,...,z}
			Γ = {0,1,x,y,z}

	String x is a prefix of string y if a string z exists where xz = y
	and x is a proper prefix of y if in addition x ̸= y .

	A language is prefix-free if no member is a proper prefix of another member.

Types of Proof

	Proof by construction
	Proof by Contradiction
	Proof by Induction

Finite Automata

	Finite automata are good models for computers with extremely limited amount of memory.

	Formal definition

	A finite automaton is a 5-tuple (Q,Σ,δ,q(0),F), where
		1. Q is a finite set called the states,
		2. Σ is a finite set called the alphabet,
		3. δ:QxΣ->Q is the transition function,
		4. q(0)∈Q is the start state, and
		5. F⊆Q is the set of accept states.(accept states sometimes are called final states.)

	If A is the set of all strings that machine M accepts, we say that A is the language of machine M and write L(M) = A

	We say that M recognizes A or that M accepts A.

	A machine always recognizes only one language.

	A language is called a regular language if some finite automaton recognizes it.



